In his book, the Functional Art,
Alberto Cairo provides a tool for
thinking about design tradeoffs when
building information graphics, and
he calls this tool
the Visualization Wheel.
In this conceptualization there
are two poles of a circle.
The top one represents highly complex
data which informs at a deep level.
While the bottom provides easier access to
data but only informs in a shallow manner.
Inside the circle are dimensions which
describe tradeoffs between two approaches.
While Cairo provides a number
of interesting dimensions.
It's important to note
that this is a tool for
designers to think about
their visualizations.
And not so much an analytics tool itself.
Your needs from any particular
problem might change which of
these dimensions are important or
might introduce new dimensions
which you should be thinking about.
Cairo actually suggests a role in an
organization or a professional background
might also influence the kinds
of graphics we want to make.
So I'd like to ask you as someone
who's studying data science,
who are you trying to reach
through your visualizations?
Let's dig in and look at a few of
the trade offs that Cairo considers.
The first is abstraction and figuration.
A highly figurative visual describes
the phenomenon using physical
representations of the phenomena,
such as photographs or drawings.
As the representations
become less real and
more conceptual, the emphasis shifts
from figuration to abstraction.
The second dimension he discusses is,
is functionality and decoration.
A completely functional graphic
has no embellishments and
is closer to a direct
representation of the data.
While a heavily decorated graphic
has more artistic embellishments.
As it is with all of these dimensions,
there isn't a clear better or worse.
Embellishments may increase
the amount of time a viewer
spends considering the visual.
Exploring it's nuances and
forming mental associations which may
increase familiarity and memorability.
The third dimension is density and
lightness as they relate to the amount
of information being shown.
There are lots of great examples
of this in scientific visuals,
where some figures are intended
to be studied in depth,
while others are meant to
quickly augment a narrative.
You can see this dimension at play
when comparing magazine infographics,
where the reader is likely to be
more heavily engaged in the content.
Two advertisements in the same magazine
where readers are likely to only
quickly consider an ad.
Here's an example from my field of study
which was published by Harvard and
MIT describing the patterns
of access of users
in the edX massive open
online course platform.
Take a moment to study this image.
What sense can you make of this image?
If we consider Cairo's third dimension.
It'd be tough not to say that
this is a fairly dense graphic.
The main portion of the graphic,
a scatterplot,
has two axes which are labeled, as do
each of the two subplots to the left and
the bottom, which are histograms.
The axis for
the histograms can be a bit confusing as
they bleed into the scatterplot axis, but
change the unit of measure and
the direction of the measurement.
For instance, in the X axis at
the top of the scatter plot,
percentage of chapters access is
being used as the unit of measure and
increases as you move towards
the right hand side of the figure.
You have the same X axis for the histogram
to the left of the graph is in
thousands of persons and increases as
you move to the left side of the figure.
There's some red lines
overlayed on the graphic.
Breaking the scatter plot roughly into
quadrants, but with minimal labeling it's
a little unclear what
the quadrants end up representing.
Regardless of whether
this is a good figure or
not, it would certainly be considered
an example of a dense figure.
The fourth aspect Cairo maps is
the dimensionality of the graphic.
A multidimensional graphic describes
a phenomena as a whole and
invites the viewer to explore many
different aspects of the phenomena.
A unidimensional graphic
instead focuses on a single or
a few items and
explores them in one or more ways.
The fifth dimension is originality and
familiarity.
In the modern world, we're used to
seeing a plethora of different kinds of
information graphics,
things like bar charts and line charts.
And thinking in terms of these
representations is taught at a very
young age.
For instance, my daughter,
who's almost five,
came home from preschool the other day
with a page that showed a bar chart.
That she and others had made in class.
To celebrate learning about the American
election, the whole class got together and
had a vote on what they would have for
snack, chocolate ice cream or
mint chocolate chip ice cream.
Of course, mint chocolate chip ice
cream won, as one might expect.
But, my point here, is that, these
are basic ways of thinking about data in
a graphical form and
they are now being taught very early on.
And this makes them familiar
to a broad population.
This wasn't always so though.
It's safe to say that the bar chart
is fairly familiar to most people but
a graphic with more originalities,
elements that need to be explained or
studied by the user.
Here's a very famous
graphic by Charles Mender.
It describes Napoleon's
march into Russia in 1812.
Take a moment to study the graphic.
Broadly speaking, there are five different
kinds of information being visualize in
this graphic.
How many of those five pieces do you see?
Here's what I see.
First there are elements of
geography showing us the various
rivers in towns along the way.
The width of the tan upper bar represents
the size of Napoleon's army, and
you can see it shrinks from the beginning
of the campaign from 422,000 to
only 100,000 once the French reach Moscow.
The lower black bar shows Napoleon's
retreat from Russia, and there are various
points along it which are mapped to
dates and temperatures in Celsius.
We see the bar thins dramatically
as the army shrinks in size.
So the five kinds of data in Mender's
visualization include location,
direction, temperature,
army size and dates.
The last dimension which Cairo shares is
the novelty and redundancy dimension.
Redundancy is the tendency of a graphic
to tell the same story in many
different ways.
For instance, you might use the height of
bars on a bar chart with an axis as well
as color to emphasize the largest bar.
This one's a bit tricky,
you don't want to bore your readers or
make your graphics overly complex.
But you do want to encode information in a
way which supports their understanding of
the phenomena you've described.
On this dimension,
novelty is the act of describing each
phenomena in the graphic in only one way.
There are no rights and
wrongs in the visualization wheel.
The purpose of the wheel is
to help you understand and
compare the visual
approaches you might take.
As a reflective activity, Cairo suggested
you can plot your thinking, a long each of
these dimensions and then join those
points together, to create a radar plot.
Here Cairo provides two examples of
the visualization wheel in action.
On the left hand side you see there is
more emphasis towards complex visuals.
Those which are dense, multidimensional
and have high functionality.
On the right,
you see the visualization wheel.
There are more elements of decoration,
lightness, and figuration.
Cairo suggests that the left
wheel is more indicative of work
being done by scientists and engineers,
while the right wheel is more
indicative of work being done by artists,
graphic designers, and journalists.
This tension between how scientists and
engineers might view the visualization of
data, and how artists and
journalists might, is an interesting one.
And we'll revisit it at
the end of next week.
In the next lecture, we'll go a bit
deeper, and consider some heuristics from
Edward Tufte,
as to what makes a good visualization.
The visualization wheel is one tool which
we have in order to better compare two
different ways of visualizing information.
In the next lecture,
we'll dig in a bit and
see how you might use the visualization
wheel to evaluate your own graphics.